Now that you've processed
your text corpus,
it's time to populate
the transition matrix,
which holds the
probabilities of going from
one state to another
in your Markov model.
Begin by filling
the first column of
your matrix with the counts
of the associated tags.
Remember, the rows in
the matrix represent
the current states,
and the columns represent
the next states.
The values represents the
transition probabilities
of going from the current
state to the next state.
The states for this use case
is the parts of speech tags.
As you can see, the
defined tags and
the elements in the corpus are
marked with corresponding colors.
For the first column,
you will count the occurrences of
the following tack combinations.
As you see here,
a noun following a start token
occurs once in our corpus.
A noun following a noun
doesn't occur at all.
A noun following a verb
doesn't occur either.
A noun following and other
tag O occurs six times.
The rest of the matrix is
populated accordingly,
but I'll take a little shortcut.
The corpus as you can see
is a verbalize high cool.
Because there are no tag
combinations with the tag VB,
they are all zero.
Unfortunately, there
is no such shortcuts
in the programming assignments.
You've been warned. The zero tag,
the O tag following a
starts token occurs twice.
The O tag following a noun tag,
NN occurs six times.
The last entry in the
transition matrix of
an O tag following an O
tag has a count of eight.
In the last line, you have to
take into account
the tagged words
on a a wet wet,
and, black to calculate
the correct count.
Now because you have calculated
the counts of all tag
combinations in the matrix,
you can calculate the
transition probabilities.
So far, you've calculated
and entered the
counts in the matrix,
which corresponds to the
numerator in our formula.
Now, you just have to divide
each counts by the sum,
which is actually the
corresponding row sum.
Remember what this
row sum represents.
For the row where
the current state
is a noun parts of speech,
the sum across that
row represents
all pairs of words where the
current state is a noun,
and the next state is
any parts of speech,
whether it's a noun,
a verb, or other.
So for the transition
probability of a noun tag
NN following a start
token, or in other words,
the initial probability
of a NN tag,
we divide 1 by 3,
or for the transition
probability of
another tag followed
by a noun tag,
we divide 6 by 14.
You may have realized that
there are two problems here.
One is that the row sum
of the VB tag is zero,
which would lead to a division
by zero using this formula.
The other is that a lot of
entries in the transition
matrix are zero,
meaning that these transitions
will have probability zero.
This won't work if
you want the model
to generalize to other equals,
which might actually
contain verbs.
To handle this, change your
formula slightly by adding
a small value epsilon
to each of the accounts
in the numerator,
and add N times epsilon to
the divisor such that the row
sum still adds up to one.
This operation is also
referred to as smoothing,
which you might remember
from previous lessons.
So if you substitute the
epsilon with a small value,
say 0.001, then you
will get the following
transition matrix.
The values shown here are
shown up to the third
decimal digits.
So don't worry if
the row sums don't add
up to one exactly.
The results of smoothing
is, as you can see,
that you no longer have any
zero value with entries in A.
Further, since the transition
probabilities from
the VB states are actually
one-third for all
outgoing transitions,
they are equally likely.
That's reasonable
since you didn't have
any data to estimate these
transition probabilities.
One more thing before you go.
In the real-world example,
you might not want to
apply smoothing to
the initial probabilities in
the first row of the
transition matrix.
That's because if you apply
smoothing to that row by
adding a small value to
possibly zeroed valued entries,
you'll effectively allow
a sentence to start with
any parts of speech tag,
including punctuation.